# useState: tic tac toe

## 📝 Your Notes

Elaborate on your learnings here in `src/exercise/04.md`
- I found it helpful to annotate the utility functions that calculate the next value, winner, and status to see how each piece worked together in this game.
- I liked how Kent explained the way you could challenge yourself to build out the functions from scratch, but that wouldn't be as helpful toward the concepts that this particular lesson focuses on for managed and derived state.
- I think this lesson was so powerful because it shows the power of React Hooks. Having come from Angular.js and writing vanilla JavaScript, it's possible but not without its own issues.
- How would I change this code for the 4x4 case or the 5x5 case?
- Learning from Kent: code up the UI before tying in the interactivity and state.
- Watching the final extra credit for managing history was illuminating. Actually looking at the different points rendered "Go to game start, Go to move #N" painted a different picture than what I interpreted the instructions to be. I like my implementation because you can't go forward or back -- you can only go back, and play out the game again. 😉
- Updating the state hooks to reflect the current step and the history is really interesting because the step only needs to remember a single number, rather than a whole set of squares. In my implementation, I kept passing the squares in both the history as well as the game state.
- I _loved_ how Kent namespaced the key for localStorage items with `tic-tac-toe:{history,step}` -- I will have to use this for my own applications to ensure my stored items are not too generically named. 😆

## Background

A `name` is one thing, but a real UI is a bit different. Often you need more
than one element of state in your component, so you'll call `React.useState`
more than once. Please note that each call to `React.useState` in a given
component will give you a unique state and updater function.

## Exercise

Production deploys:

- [Exercise](https://react-hooks.netlify.app/isolated/exercise/04.js)
- [Final](https://react-hooks.netlify.app/isolated/final/04.js)

We're going to build tic-tac-toe (with localStorage support)! If you've gone
through React's official tutorial, this was lifted from that (except that
example still uses classes).

You're going to need some managed state and some derived state:

- **Managed State:** State that you need to explicitly manage
- **Derived State:** State that you can calculate based on other state

`squares` is the managed state and it's the state of the board in a
single-dimensional array:

```
[
  'X', 'O', 'X',
  'X', 'O', 'O',
  'X', 'X', 'O'
]
```

This will start out as an empty array because it's the start of the game.

`nextValue` will be either the string `X` or `O` and is derived state which you
can determine based on the value of `squares`. We can determine whose turn it is
based on how many "X" and "O" squares there are. We've written this out for you
in a `calculateNextValue` function at the bottom of the file.

`winner` will be either the string `X` or `O` and is derived state which can
also be determined based on the value of `squares` and we've provided a
`calculateWinner` function you can use to get that value.

📜 Read more about derived state in
[Don't Sync State. Derive It!](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/dont-sync-state-derive-it)

### Alternate:

If you'd prefer to practice refactoring a class that does this to a hook, then
you can open `src/exercise/04-classes.js` and open that on
[an isolated page](http://localhost:3000/isolated/exercise/04-classes.js) to
practice that.

## Extra Credit

### 1. 💯 preserve state in localStorage

[Production deploy](https://react-hooks.netlify.app/isolated/final/04.extra-1.js)

👨‍💼 Our customers want to be able to pause a game, close the tab, and then resume
the game later. Can you store the game's state in `localStorage`?

### 2. 💯 useLocalStorageState

[Production deploy](https://react-hooks.netlify.app/isolated/final/04.extra-2.js)

It's cool that we can get localStorage support with a simple `useEffect`, but
it'd be even cooler to use the `useLocalStorageState` hook that's already
written for us in `src/utils.js`!

Refactor your code to use that custom hook instead. (This should be a pretty
quick extra credit).

### 3. 💯 add game history feature

[Production deploy](https://react-hooks.netlify.app/isolated/final/04.extra-3.js)

Open `http://localhost:3000/isolated/final/04.extra-3.js` and see that the extra
version supports keeping a history of the game and allows you to go backward and
forward in time. See if you can implement that!

NOTE: This extra credit is one of the harder extra credits. Don't worry if you
struggle on it!

💰 Tip, in the final example, we store the history of squares in an array of
arrays. `[[/* step 0 squares */], [/* step 1 squares */], ...etc]`, so we have
two states: `history` and `currentStep`.

💰 Tip, in the final example, we move the state management from the `Board`
component to the `Game` component and that helps a bit. Here's what the JSX
returned from the `Game` component is in the final version:

```javascript
return (
  <div className="game">
    <div className="game-board">
      <Board onClick={selectSquare} squares={currentSquares} />
      <button className="restart" onClick={restart}>
        restart
      </button>
    </div>
    <div className="game-info">
      <div>{status}</div>
      <ol>{moves}</ol>
    </div>
  </div>
)
```

## 🦉 Feedback

Fill out
[the feedback form](https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=React%20Hooks%20%F0%9F%8E%A3&e=04%3A%20useState%3A%20tic%20tac%20toe&em=).
