# useRef and useEffect: DOM interaction

## 📝 Your Notes

Elaborate on your learnings here in `src/exercise/05.md`

- After this exercise, I wonder if it's possible to "tilt"-ify the earlier tic tac toe game. 😆
- Reading [React: useRef() docs](https://reactjs.org/docs/hooks-reference.html#useref) and going through the previous videos really helped me understand what was going on here as far as the difference between React Elements and the DOM. React Elements by themselves are just representations of your UI in Javascript. They don't actually do anything to the DOM. It's not until `ReactDOM.render` method is called that it processes those React Elements accordingly. As this exercise illuminates, the whole point of this is to have direct access to the DOM. By default, you do _not_ have access to the DOM -- React gives you a declarative way to describe your interface and how it should behave. While it's important to know about the DOM at a high-level, you don't need to go through a low-level understanding unless the use case calls for actual DOM manipulation (like Vanilla Tilt requires here).

## Background

Often when working with React you'll need to integrate with UI libraries. Some
of these need to work directly with the DOM. Remember that when you do:
`<div>hi</div>` that's actually syntactic sugar for a `React.createElement` so
you don't actually have access to DOM nodes in your function component. In fact,
DOM nodes aren't created at all until the `ReactDOM.render` method is called.
Your function component is really just responsible for creating and returning
React Elements and has nothing to do with the DOM in particular.

So to get access to the DOM, you need to ask React to give you access to a
particular DOM node when it renders your component. The way this happens is
through a special prop called `ref`.

Here's a simple example of using the `ref` prop:

```javascript
function MyDiv() {
  const myDivRef = React.useRef()
  React.useEffect(() => {
    const myDiv = myDivRef.current
    // myDiv is the div DOM node!
    console.log(myDiv)
  }, [])
  return <div ref={myDivRef}>hi</div>
}
```

After the component has been rendered, it's considered "mounted." That's when
the React.useEffect callback is called and so by that point, the ref should have
its `current` property set to the DOM node. So often you'll do direct DOM
interactions/manipulations in the `useEffect` callback.

## Exercise

Production deploys:

- [Exercise](https://react-hooks.netlify.app/isolated/exercise/05.js)
- [Final](https://react-hooks.netlify.app/isolated/final/05.js)

In this exercise we're going to make a `<Tilt />` component that renders a div
and uses the `vanilla-tilt` library to make it super fancy.

The thing is, `vanilla-tilt` works directly with DOM nodes to setup event
handlers and stuff, so we need access to the DOM node. But because we're not the
one calling `document.createElement` (React does) we need React to give it to
us.

So in this exercise we're going to use a `ref` so React can give us the DOM node
and then we can pass that on to `vanilla-tilt`.

Additionally, we'll need to clean up after ourselves if this component is
unmounted. Otherwise we'll have event handlers dangling around on DOM nodes that
are no longer in the document.

### Alternate:

If you'd prefer to practice refactoring a class that does this to a hook, then
you can open `src/exercise/05-classes.js` and open that on
[an isolated page](http://localhost:3000/isolated/exercise/05-classes.js) to
practice that.

## 🦉 Feedback

Fill out
[the feedback form](https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=React%20Hooks%20%F0%9F%8E%A3&e=05%3A%20useRef%20and%20useEffect%3A%20DOM%20interaction&em=).
